Integration of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) 
in honeypot architecture has brought a sea change in the traditional 
designs that were usually challenged by many drawbacks. This is ach -
ieved by utilizing AI for network traffic analysis and the identification of 
malicious behavior, followed by adaptive adjustment of their responses 
to keep the attackers engaged. The capabilities would make honeypots 
more resilient and increase their efficacy in detecting and countering 
complex threats. Machine learning allows honeypots to filter out back -
ground noise and irrelevant data efficiently, thus focusing on real 
threats. This reduces the workload for analysts, accelerates detection 
and response, and overall reinforces the cybersecurity framework 
( Angeli et al., 2024 ).
Recent advancements have enhanced honeypots by integrating large 
language models, including GPT-3. This model allows honeypots to 
interact with adversaries in a very human-like way, therefore luring 
them into exposing their tactics, techniques, and procedures. These in -
teractions are particularly useful for responding to social engineering 
attacks, where the adversary leverages human vulnerabilities to gain 
unauthorized access to systems. In such cases, LLM-enhanced honeypots 
gather valuable intelligence on attacker tactics and motivations by 
generating realistic dialogues ( Raut et al., 2023 ). The latest generation 
of honeypots, equipped with retrieval-augmented generation tech -
niques, offers greater dynamism and adaptability. RAG allows honeypot 
systems to achieve a far better level of contextual accuracy and 
responsiveness by leveraging external data sources for real-time adap -
tation to diversified attack patterns and conditions.
The integration of RAG and LLMs brings substantial novelties to 
honeypot design: first, RAG frameworks allow the honeypot to fetch 
relevant external data with which to generate contextually appropriate 
responses, enhancing the realism in emulating a real-world environment 
( Dang et al., 2024 ). In a honeypot, it enhances the reality enough to 
make it credulously sustainable for extended interaction with attackers. 
Similarly, LLM allows for complex and dynamic responses that keep 
pace with adversaries ’ expected actions strongly. In the context of web 
application honeypots, advanced technologies have been utilized in 
emulating API operations in an efficient manner while their outcomes 
are based on contextual information. Therefore, combining RAG and 
LLMs arms honeypots with a capability of high-order deceiving while 
harvesting critical intelligence of attacker ’ s techniques and strategic 
mindsets ( Buzzio-Garcia, 2021 ).
This paper presents a new honeypot system using large language 
models with retrieval-augmented generation to mimic the conversations 
involved in Web APIs. The first part outlines two important components: 
the command extractor and the response generator. The command 
extractor converts the API requests into structured prompt-response 
pairs for enriching the fine-tuning of the large language model. In 
contrast, a response generator augmented with out-of-the-box knowl -
edge from retrieval-augmented generation would simulate realistic and 
contextually relevant responses to engage attackers. The system was 
evaluated using a best-match similarity metric, whereby the inputs from 
attackers were compared with outputs produced by the LLM. The test 
shows that the honeypot is able to realistically emulate a real system and 
attract malicious actors, providing real-world information to improve 
security measures.
This study introduces DecoyPot, a novel honeypot system that le -
verages state-of-the-art technologies, including Retrieval-Augmented 
Generation and Large Language Models, to create dynamic and con -
textually accurate API interactions. Unlike traditional honeypots, 
DecoyPot combines generative modeling with retrieval mechanisms to 
enhance deception capabilities and adapt to sophisticated attacker 
strategies. The system ’ s effectiveness has been demonstrated through 
rigorous evaluations, achieving high-response similarity scores with real 
API interactions. This performance highlights DecoyPot ’ s ability to 
generate realistic and semantically aligned responses, ensuring a 
convincing engagement with attackers while collecting valuable intel -
ligence on their tactics and techniques. DecoyPot ’ s architecture has been 
validated across diverse API domains, including Internet of Things, 
finance, healthcare, and e-commerce. This adaptability underscores its 
versatility in addressing various attack vectors, making it a robust tool 
for proactive cyber defense and deception.
The rest of this manuscript is organized as follows: Section 2 presents 
related work on honeypot systems, focusing on the progress of research 
work at the areas of AI and ML integrations. Section 3 describes the 
design and architecture of the proposed system and highlights the 
novelties in the work. Section 4 outlines data collection and training 
methods, along with incorporating a variety of API domains. Section 5
provides an overview of the experimental setup and the evaluation 
metrics. Section 6 , the concluding section, is a detailed discussion of the 
results and the analysis that followed while Conclusion Section 7 dis -
cusses future directions for research.
2. Related work
From very simple decoy mechanisms to more sophisticated, 
dynamically adapting, intelligent platforms, honeypots have evolved 
into critical components of modern cybersecurity methodologies. 
Effectively attracting, interacting with, and misleading attackers, hon -
eypots provide the precious intelligence about malicious strategies be -
sides functioning as an important layer in security. The section is focused 
on honeypot technology evolution through detailed application strate -
gies, optimization techniques, and applications across all main areas of 
cybersecurity.
2.1. Introduction to honeypots
Honeypots are security mechanisms that mimic a vulnerable system 
with the intention of attracting an attacker, studying their behavior, and 
gathering relevant intelligence. The first honeypots were very simple 
and static structures that mimicked a common vulnerability, but they 
proved to be no match against the ever-evolving sophistication of cyber 
threats. While these primitive honeypots were good enough for simple 
reconnaissance, their utility quickly faded as attackers developed tools 
that could identify and avoid these traps ( Kristyanto et al., 2022 , Angeli 
et al., 2024 , Maldonado et al., 2024 ).
Such shortcomings were, until recently, countered by new honeypot 
technologies based ML, AI, and LLMs. These enhancements further 
allowed the honeypot to dynamically adapt to the new methods of 
attack, simulate real environments, and interact more effectively with 
an attacker. The evolution has so far expanded their use beyond the 
traditional network security to also involve those on Internet of Things 
(IoT), Industrial Control Systems (ICS), and Cyber-physical systems 
(CPS) applications ( Sladi ´c et al., 2024 , Suhail et al., 2023 ).
2.2. Interaction levels in honeypots
Low-interaction honeypots can mimic very basic functionalities, 
such as simple network services, to attract attackers. These systems are 
generally lightweight and very easy to deploy, and hence suitable for 
detecting reconnaissance activities ( Kristyanto et al., 2022 ). However, 
their limited interaction capabilities often fail to deceive sophisticated 
attackers who may identify them as decoys. The study in ( Lygerou et al., 
2022 ) illustrates the use of low-interaction honeypots in IoT networks. 
Such systems emulate protocol-specific environments to monitor IoT 
traffic to detect potential threats ( Karpukhin et al., 2020 ). Although 
useful for the initial detection stage, low-interaction honeypots cannot 
provide an insight into advanced attack strategies.
Medium-interaction honeypots provide an effective compromise 
between functionality and resource efficiency by emulating services 
such as databases or web servers. These systems are particularly suitable 
for environments with moderate security requirements, as they balance 
engagement depth with ease of deployment and maintenance 
( Karpukhin et al., 2020 , Lewis et al., 2020 ). By enabling attackers to 
A. Sezgin and A. Boyacı                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Computers & Security 154 (2025) 104458 
2 